# Be HypeAware {#be-hypeaware}

_Date posted: 26 January 2009_

As a learning professional I get a lot of material written by companies that want me to buy or recommend their products. I wish, though, there was a little bit more reality in the descriptions and a lot less hype and [FUD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear,_uncertainty_and_doubt). As an example, here's an excerpt from a recent [Learning Magazine](http://www.learnevents.com/learning-magazine.php). (NB. Other sources are just as guilty!)

> [Major elearning company] unveiled a global survey that shows roughly seven out of 10 workers have been asked to accomplish tasks without receiving proper training beforehand. Within IT ... the problem is even more pronounced.

The "problem"?! Why is it a problem? It's only a problem if you believe that you have to fill people up with knowledge before they can do anything. Isn't that a rather old-fashioned view of what learning is all about? Do we train our children to walk before they are allowed to take their first steps? No! What we do is give them support and coaching in a safe environment - where failure is OK. To be honest, I quite relish being given a task I've never done before. It gives me something new to learn. Then we get onto the buzzwords like SCORM. It sounds great in theory, but is often worse than useless in practice. (See: SCORM Warning) And what about about all those articles that reference the pseudo-scientific concept of "Learning Styles"! For example, the VW case study which talked about some consultants that "found" that apprentices were enthused in the workshop and not in the classroom. They wrapped it in some learning style mumbo-jumbo and redesigned the classroom learning to include more hands-on stuff, more pictures and more reference to popular figures (eg. David Beckham). That's nothing to do with individual learning preferences. It's all about knowing your audience and the sorts of things that they respond to. The problem with the learning style approach is that it leads you, if you're not careful, into pigeonholing people, based on a questionnaire they filled in some time ago. In reality, individuals may have different ways of learning that depend on the context, on their emotional state, on the subject covered, on the time of day it is etc. Good teachers know that they need to vary how they approach things. How they do that will take into account all those factors. (Just compare how children respond on a Monday morning to a Friday afternoon!) It's not rocket science. (See: Heterodoxy: [Learning styles don't matter](http://www.doceo.co.uk/heterodoxy/styles.htm))