# What do you do at work, Daddy? {#what-do-you-do-at-work-daddy}

_Date posted: 5 December 2008_

Well - it's complicated, but basically I help people use websites to learn. This is what I did this week: **Monday** I finished setting up a website to help us run lots of tests. Only people who pass the tests can use a new computer programme that will help teachers and social workers find out who else is working with the children they are helping. I then wrote a long review, for one of my clients, of different types of training for managers on the internet. In this I wrote a set of questions so that my client could review more online training that they come across. Finally, I ordered another Moodle site that's going to help us train lots of people how to help other people find out information about hospitals and their health. **Tuesday** I built a Powerpoint presentation all about how people around the world use computers and the internet to help them learn. While I was doing this I had to help some of my other clients use the websites we made for them. **Wednesday** I helped a client choose a company that's going to build a really complicated website where people can try out different ways of managing people. I made some quick movies with Jing to show one of my clients how to use their new website that we built with Joomla. I gave the presentation that I built on Tuesday to a team of people that wanted to learn how schools are changing. **Thursday** I worked out how much it was going to cost to build a big website containing lots of information about working with a particular council. I had a long talk with a team of experts to work out how we can join up our huge Moodle site (that's got 20,000 people in it!) with our SAP computer system that manages all the people in our company. **Friday** I was planning the training programme where we use the Moodle site I ordered on Monday. There - I told you it was complicated! The amazing thing is no-one has ever taught me how to do any of these things. I've had to learn by finding out, by trying things, and by making mistakes. If you can learn how to learn, then you can do anything!