# Criticism, product development and self-censorship {#criticism-product-development-and-self-censorship}

_Date posted: 19 June 2008_

How do you respond to criticism? Me? My immediate response is normally to go off in a huff - but I'm working on that! Let's say you're creating a product for some people to use, and one of that group says it's difficult to use, how would you respond? If it was me, I would try to engage with that person to find out why they find it difficult and then make the decision whether to change the product. What happens if that person reviews your product in public? For example, in a web forum, or on a personal website? A company that understands the dynamics of the web would probably respond to the criticism. They'd engage with the community, but especially with that individual. By bringing on board someone who has been critical they are more likely to win converts. A company that doesn't understand the web may decide to request that the offending article be removed. This is despite the fact that it will still exist in the Google cache. And despite the fact that they have no legal right to request that personal opinion be removed. Just imagine what would happen if theatres or restaurants could effectively censor newspaper critics! Yet this is exactly what has happened to [Doug Belshaw](http://www.dougbelshaw.com/2008/06/17/censorship-and-the-personalprofessional-divide/). Following an article (on his personal website) in which he commented on a number of online learning environments for schools, one of the companies mentioned (TALMOS) threatened legal proceedings on him via his school if he didn't remove an offending paragraph. Doug complied with this request due to the difficult situation it put him under at work. There's a disclaimer on my blog that states that it's totally independent of any professional relationship that I have. Yet, even so, I am very careful to ensure that my writing does not cause embarrassment or give away confidential information. That's just sensible self-censorship. I can't blame Doug for removing the offending words. In fact, by doing so he's probably highlighted how little the company concerned understands the web. But I am surprised that his school couldn't see the parallels between writing reviews of teaching materials (in, for example, the TES) and writing similar reviews on a personal website. I wonder how it might have caused embarrassment to the school? Is there anything that could have predicted that response?