# Preparing for Naace Conference 2007 {#preparing-for-naace-conference-2007}

_Date posted: 9 January 2007_

[http://torquayconference07.naaceblogs.org/2006/12/29/online-social-networking-and-teacher-cpd/](http://torquayconference07.naaceblogs.org/2006/12/29/online-social-networking-and-teacher-cpd/)

I've been asked to run one of the parallel sessions at this year's [Naace conference](http://www.naace.org/resource.asp?menuItemId=7). The session outline is:

> Online social networking tools have the potential to support reflective and collaborative CPD both within and across schools and local authorities. This session will examine what’s possible, raise a number of issues, and suggest ways in which using such tools can become an integrated part of your CPD approach.

I'm totally convinced that, to get the best out of a conference you a) need to know where people are coming from beforehand, and b) have some means of follow-up. Keeping in mind that social networks really only work when the conversation is two way, I intend to use this blog to pose a number of "sparks" before the session. This is so that a) I can find out who, in my network, will be there, and b) collect some more examples of where online networks have supported CPD. I am hoping that the conversation will continue into the session in Torquay. Although I need to think how that will work with an audience of 150+ ? Being part of a network is all about what you do as an individual. It's not really about organisations or the other people in the network. So the session will conclude with some very practical ideas to help people develop their own personal CPD network, and how to encourage that development in with teachers they work with. So, with all that in mind, what questions and issues would you want to see addressed in this session? I know that many people who read this blog won't be at the session itself, but that's the beauty of online networks - there are no physical or temporal barriers to participation.