# Command & control vs Learning Anarchy? {#command-control-vs-learning-anarchy}

_Date posted: 10 February 2011_

I was wondering why I react so strongly when people talk about **allowing** people to access learning resources dependent on their role in the organisation. I think it's because, over the past eight years, ever since I left the teaching profession, I've learnt how to learn independently. The organisation I work for, although it encourages formal learning & training, also gives people the freedom to see where they want to go and to learn how to get there. There are very few restrictions (if you're sensible!) on what we can access on the internet. We are trusted to spend our time wisely (as long as the job gets done), and, in my role, allowed to choose where we work. This philosophy of trust and devolved responsibility is endemic throughout the company; financial management decisions are pushed down as far as possible, as are personnel/human resources processes (such as recruitment, absence management etc). Of course, such a level of responsibility is not left unchecked or unsupported. Strong accountability is built in at all levels. The key thing, from a learning perpective, is the underlying expectation - you will go and learn what you need to learn to meet your personal, team and organisational needs. When I was teaching, that expectation (in my eyes at least) was turned on its head. I tended used a lack of "training" as an excuse. From my perspective at that time, it was the school's responsibility to give me that training. Now, I see that it is my responsibility to be aware of what learning I need and to find it, when I need it. My personal feeling is that if we put up barriers that say to adults "you're not ready for this yet, so you can't come in", we take away that level of responsibility that lets people make choices. Yes, we should guide people to help them make good choices, but is it a bad thing if they access some materials or join a forum, that are too "difficult" for them?