# A first look at Moodle 2 {#a-first-look-at-moodle-2}

_Date posted: 12 January 2011_

I've been using [Moodle 2.0](http://moodle.org/) in anger for a few months now, and thought it was time to put down a few thoughts about how it differs from Moodle 1.x. At the moment, I would say I'm only scratching the surface of Moodle 2's functionality. There's a lot of behind-the-scenes changes that I'm just not touching at all (eg. the [new API's](http://docs.moodle.org/en/Moodle_2.0_release_notes#For_developers:_API_changes) ([API = Application Programming Interface](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface)) So, this is just an initial look at some of the things that have jumped out as I've used it.

### Conditional Activities {#conditional-activities}

In Moodle 1.x it was possible to set up conditional activities only with quite a major hack to the code. In Moodle 2.0 it's built in, and works extremely well. This was why I chose to use Moodle 2.0 for a project I'm working on. It's allowed us to create an assignment, and then show a suggested answer to that assignment only once the tutor has given a mark. That's what Conditional Activities do - they allow course designers to set up quite sophisticated pathways that only open up once certain conditions have been met. How you use them will depend very much on your learning philosphy - particularly your belief as to how much control a learner should have over their own lesson. If you're one of [those people who won't even let a learner turn over the page until they completed an activity on that page](http://www.articulate.com/rapid-elearning/does-president-obama-support-locking-your-e-learning-course-navigation/) then you'll have a field day with this new functionality. If you're more like me, and prefer to provide a [scaffolded learner experience](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instructional_scaffolding) with free access to resources, then you'll want to use this with care.

### Management menus {#management-menus}

Now, I don't know whether it's just because I've grown up with Moodle (since version 1.0!) but there are some bits of the new interface it's taking a little while to get used to. I quite liked the Update this Activity button at the top right. It was always there, and easy to get to. Similarly, when I'm supporting users I often used the Login As button on their profile. It was in a sensible place, at the bottom of their profile. Now the interface consists of an administration menu block that changes depending on where you are in the site. This has several advantages, but some key disadvantages:

#### Advantages {#advantages}

*   It allows more functionality to be exposed immediately to the user
*   It's in a consistent place, and behaves in a consistent way

#### Disadvantages {#disadvantages}

*   If you've got more than a couple of blocks on the page, this administration block disappears off the bottom of the page very quickly. That means the user has to scroll immediately just to get to core functions.
*   The interface is now separated from the functions it's controlling. It's only a minor change, but has a significant impact

### Theme packs {#theme-packs}

There are some major changes to the ways theme packs are designed (See post: [Creating a Moodle 2.0 theme](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2010/11/03/creating-a-new-theme-for-moodle-2?blog=5)). It means that your Moodle 1.9 themes will need a complete rework. Having said that, it didn't take long to get the hang of how the new CSS structures work. The only thing I wasn't able to do is remove the "Show topic" buttons from the course page. This was always [the first thing I did in Moodle 1.x](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2008/11/27/working-with-moodle-themes?blog=5), as, in my experience, that one part of the interface causes great problems for users. The new theming structure should mean we'll get a lot more good-looking Moodle sites. With Moodle 1.x you could see a Moodle site from miles away. I'm looking forward to coming across a site and not knowing it's Moodle...

### Course files interface {#course-files-interface}

I know there's been a lot of discussion about this already, but this is one part of Moodle where I think the interface has lost out to functionality. When I first came across Moodle I was responsible for another online learning system that we were selling into schools. As part of my work, I spent three days with each school, helping them get to grips with the system and working through the implications of online learning on school structures and practices. At least, that was the theory. In practice, much of the time was spent walking the teachers through the convoluted process of getting files onto the server, and then building a link to those files. Moodle was a breath of fresh air. The workflow had obviously been designed by real people. You started out by saying you wanted to add a Resource to a course, and then Moodle took you through a carefully crafted process to add the resource and upload the file(s). For those who wanted to be a bit more advanced, it was possible to upload a zip file of resources, and then, after unzipping, use those files for other course resources. The only problem with the Moodle 1.x approach was that of reusability. Each course would need its own copy of the files it needed. Let's say there was a standard document that needed to go into each course, it would need a separate copy in each course file store. This led to a few difficulties. If that document needed to change, then it would have to be reuploaded many times. No problem if you've got a small Moodle site. But for large sites, or sites with large files, it became quite a headache. For many the answer was to leave Moodle's basic, but friendly, content-management functions, and implement repositories (like [HarvestRoad Hive](http://www.giuntilabs.com/en/products/harvestroad-hive-digital-repository)) that sat underneath Moodle. These are great systems, but often quite complex and expensive. Moodle 2.0 has adopted a different approach to managing content. For the details of it, take a look at Moodle Docs. Basically, it allows files to be used more than once; across multiple courses. But, in doing so, the workflow for basic use has become considerably more complex. Course designers/teachers now have to make many more choices when working through the process - with a corresponding increase in the confusion that can result. The underlying model is far less easy to comprehend and explain than the old course files store. Which, for people without an IT background, can be quite a barrier to use. Also, there now appears to be no way of uploading a batch of files in one zip file, and then picking from those files for a number of resources. (Please tell me if that's not true!) I haven't got an answer to the zip file problem, but my solution to the complex interface would be to, by default, only give users a basic "upload files" interface, with the option to switch on "advanced file management" as they gain in confidence.

### Book Module {#book-module}

This was always one of the first additional modules I put into my Moodle 1.x sites. It provided a way of creating a set of HTML pages very quickly. No, it wasn't particularly pretty, and didn't do anything fancy (like annotations or comments) from a learning perspective. But it was useful. I'd hoped this would be incorporated into a new multi-page HTML resource-type in Moodle 2.0, but that hasn't yet appeared, and there's no news yet on when the Book module will be ported across to Moodle 2.x. I know this is a major blocker for many organisations who would otherwise upgrade their Moodle sites. Let's hope it gets sorted soon.

### Conclusions {#conclusions}

Moodle 2.0 has been a long time coming. There's a lot that has changed under the bonnet (hood), but these are invisible to most people. Those who were hoping for more of a web 2.0 design and user interface will be quite disappointed. There's a lot of work to be done to make the (admin) interface compare with tools like [Wordpress](http://wordpress.org/), [b2evolution](http://b2evolution.net/) and [Kashflow](http://www.kashflow.co.uk/default_b.asp). For people who have now grown up with Amazon, Google and Ebay, these factors are critical to encourage organisation-wide adoption. If we're not careful, Moodle will become loved by the techies and senior management, but will lose its core fanbase - the teachers and course designers who fell for Moodle's simplicity and ease of use. It's a fine balance to keep; help those who pay the bills, whilst, at the same time, help those who will champion the system in their organisations. I'm hoping that Moodle 2.0 will be the start of some major improvements to bring Moodle into this decade. It's still an extremely flexible platform for tutor-led learning interventions, and certainly one I'd still recommend any organisation consider to support teaching or training.