# BBC - History - Games - CDX {#bbc-history-games-cdx}

_Date posted: 25 September 2006_

[http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/history/ancient/romans/rome/index.shtml](http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/history/ancient/romans/rome/index.shtml)

Thanks to [Leon Cych](http://elgg.net/leoncych/weblog/131405.html) for this. Personally, I'm not a fan of most of the stuff that I see out there purporting to be elearning. I've got a very short attention span, and most of it just does not engage me, and usually puts too many barriers in the way before I even get started. But this, from the BBC, has grabbed me totally. No learning objectives. Not even any indication it's about Rome (except for the URL). But, now I'm getting the idea of what it's about, and I just want more! It's a narrative. It's an adventure game. It's got suspense. But it's also got the "normal" learning things, such as questions and information sources. But in this case the questions have a purpose - I can't go further in the narrative without finding out the answers. The information sources aren't necessarily inside the narrative (eg. they seem to have set up a TypePad blog specifically to support it), and they're not just the standard text/graphics resource. The radio in particular was a stroke of genius - how better to set a time/location context than a radio that you could tune yourself? Got to stop writing now, and get back to the game, sorry, learning. [Edit] Fascinating this. I've just shown the BBC Rome game to my wife, and she couldn't see the point... if she wants information about Rome she'd just look it up on Google, why does she need to "faff around" with a game? Hmmm... does this sort of thing depend on either a) innate curiousity and fascination with new things or b) a teacher figure who is saying you need to learn such and such, and here's a fun way to do it?