# Reflections on Learning Technologies 2012 {#reflections-on-learning-technologies-2012}

_Date posted: 26 January 2012_

#lt12uk This year, I was only able to attend the [Learning Technologies conference](http://www.learningtechnologies.co.uk/conference/) for one day. Previous learning technology-related conferences that I've attended (not just Learning Technologies) have suffered from one major problem: They have not made best use of my time as a delegate. Being face-to-face with someone is a rare opportunity, and incredibly valuable. Yet we waste it on things that could be done just as effectively without requiring long-distance travel and hotel stays. What I want to do in that time is to take part in conversations - even if that's just listening in. It's the interaction between people that can only be done in a face-to-face environment which is worth paying for. So, this year, I decided to forego the pleasure of any of the conference sessions (except my own, of course - which I tried to make as interactive as possible!) Instead, I spent the day taking the opportunity to:

*   catch up with contacts from LinkedIn and Twitter - including seeing my friends from [Xyleme](http://www.xyleme.com/), it was a very pleasant surprise seeing them over from Colorado
*   connect with current and potential suppliers
*   lead one of [Towards Maturity's Exchanges](http://towardsmaturity.org/article/2012/01/11/learning-technology-exchange-new-2012/) on the exhibition floor - where a group of us basically held an impromptu [Action Learning](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_learning) session, digging into a problem raised by one of the participants
*   have group conversations about the interface between learning and technology

This was by far the best use of the limited time I had, and by far the most useful conference I'd been to. I didn't come away with many new ideas, but, then, I get those on a daily basis through my RSS Reader and Twitter account. What did happen, through those conversations, was a refinement of my own ideas as they get knocked about by other people. If I get invited to run a session at another conference, I would like to run it completely differently. Rather than trying to squeeze short interactions into a presentation format, instead, I would like to work on the assumption that people are already up-to-date with my present thinking on the topic in question. Then we could build the whole session around facilitated conversations with each other. And if was running a conference like this, I would ask all my experts to publish their content somewhere in advance, and focus less on presentation, and far more on questions and conversation. It's all about practising what we preach as learning professionals!