# Society

## Aggregated health records - who do we trust? {#aggregated-health-records-who-do-we-trust}

_Date posted: 29 July 2009_

Through recent events I've become acutely aware of how completely disorganised is the National Health Service's methods of keeping patient records. Every GP (general practitioner), hospital, consultant, dentist, physiotherapist, geriatric unit, and occupational therapist keeps their own records. Those records sit in computer systems or on bits of paper. Sometimes the different agencies talk to each other. More often they don't. This leaves patients and their families to try to pull together all these disparate pieces of information into a coherent whole. The NHS is currently going through an immense IT project to try to build a national patient record system. [It sounds like](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/7887438.stm) this is well over budget, over time, and doesn't work. It's by far the biggest project of its kind. Perhaps it's too big to ever work? Instead of a monolithic system, how about adopting a "small pieces, loosely joined" philosophy. And instead of the doctors controlling what goes into your record, let the patient decide who they trust with their data? Each individual could have a data store. It could be on an ID card, on a tag that you keep around your neck, on a USB stick, on a secure website even. Whenever you need to see your doctor, consultant, therapist, insurance company etc you give them access to the records you want them to be able to see. When the consultation or hospital stay is over the notes kept will be sent to your data store. There are numerous political and technical barriers to get over to make this succeed:

*   The data will need to be stored in a consistent, standardised format?
*   A range of transport mechanisms will need to be agreed and standardised
*   Data security concerns will need to be addressed through simple, but effective encryption and authentication mechanisms
*   Software and hardware providers will need to comply with an accreditation or registration process which provides a stamp of approval

None of this is easy. But, once the ground rules are in place and placed in the public domain, it allows a much more distributed development process than is currently happening. We might even get a system that works.

## The future of capitalism? {#the-future-of-capitalism}

_Date posted: 5 July 2012_

You'd think, given the immense problems seen with capitalism over the past few years, that more people would be up in arms about how our corporate institutions deal with people. I won't pretend to understand very much about how capitalism works, or even much about economics. But I am interested in the beliefs that underpin how our society works, and the effects on society when those beliefs are allowed to work through to their full extent. [Charles Handy's conversation session](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2012/04/18/reflections-on-a-conversation-with?blog=5) about the Future of Capitalism opened up a few points that left me thinking..., particularly as [I'm now in the market for a private pension](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2012/06/28/all-change?blog=5). I'm starting to realise that all the options available for investment in a pension are based on market-values; whether it's the current price of the Euro, of gold, or of the price of the shares in a particular company. When you "invest" in these, you're not actually making an investment in the thing itself. This particularly applies to company shares. The money invested in them doesn't go to the company to enable it to grow (except in the case of the initial offer of shares). Instead, you're just making a statement of confidence in the thing you're investing in. Pension funds (one of the main drivers of capitalist thinking and behaviours), through their share ownership, gain a role in the governance of companies, but none of the money invested in the pension actually goes to the company itself. There must be some benefits to this disconnect, but I'm not sure I understand them yet. It does seem that the whole pensions market is just a bit of a gamble, all based on how people "feel" about the market, rather than about genuine economic growth. It would be so much better, in my opinion, if I could invest my pension in schemes or programmes where the money could be used to stimulate growth, to make real products, or generate real benefits for people. For example, personal-lending programmes like ([Zopa](http://uk.zopa.com/) and [Funding Circle](https://www.fundingcircle.com/)). But that's against the pension rules. I think because the HMRC want some level of independent governance that prevents fraudulent tax avoidance. I'm all for that, but there must be a way to make real pension investments that aren't just dependent on the movements of a market value? Any ideas?

## Choosing proprietary over open source {#choosing-proprietary-over-open-source}

_Date posted: 16 August 2012_

I'm a firm believer in the open source movement, whether it's for software and any other sort of creative endeavour. Through the generousity of many people working together towards a shared vision some great achievements have been made. Just look at projects such as Moodle, Wordpress, and most of the software that underpins the internet. When starting [Wyver Solutions](http://www.wyversolutions.co.uk/), my aim was to build it as much as possible on open-source principles - using open-source software, and being generous in our own approach to content and ideas. As well as keeping costs down, it also fits in with [our values](http://www.wyversolutions.co.uk/cms/about/our-values/). But, at the same time, you have to be pragmatic. If using open-source software means that you will need to spend too much time learning new ways of working, or it means that you can't communicate with the rest of the world easily, then it's time to change. I made that decision years ago when I chose to go down the Mac OS route for operating systems, and now I'm having to make that decision for office software. Every organisation needs to have a suite of business communication software (ie. word processor, presentations and spreadsheets). Up to now, I've been working happily in [OpenOffice](http://www.openoffice.org/). That's fine if you are the only person involved, and the output is going to be a PDF. But as soon as you need to start sharing documents and presentations, with complex formatting, with other people who use other software (ie. MS Office), then it becomes time to fall into line and adopt what has become (through weight of numbers rather than any collective decision) the de facto standard. It came to a head when I spent hours on an OpenOffice Writer document that just wouldn't display correctly when converted to the Word .doc format. It would have been fine if I'd just been publishing a PDF, or working with someone who used a application that had adopted the OASIS [Open Document Format](http://opendocumentformat.org/) (a worldwide standard). But, in most of the organisations I'm working with, MS Office (and the Microsoft interpretation of ODF) has become the standard way of working. So, it's time to get out the cash. Not because the software does anything better, but because, if I want to work with other people I need to fall into line.