# Corporate IT versus SAAS : an unequal contest {#corporate-it-versus-saas-an-unequal-contest}

_Date posted: 10 November 2011_

Corporate IT in many organisations is in a difficult position at the moment; squeezed between its users with ever-increasing expectations, and between shareholders who want even more value for money. And then along come the Software As A Service (SAAS) companies offering to meet user expectations and at a better price. It's just not fair! In this article, I will take a look at how the SAAS providers are able to do so much, so cheaply; why it's almost impossible for internal IT departments to compete on equal terms; and some possible routes forward for corporate IT. SAAS providers put their application onto an Internet-facing server (or, more likely, servers) and make that single application available to multiple clients. This is known as the multi-tenanted model, and is one of the most common form of SAAS operation. What this means is that SAAS software is highly commoditised, you buy as little or as much of it as you want. That's where corporate IT, with their bespoke implementations each time, just cannot compete. By having a single instance of their software, SAAS providers significantly reduce the cost of deployment and maintainance. They only have to do things once. Of course, they have to do it right first time, but that's why most SAAS providers have extremely rigorous testing and deployment procedures to prevent any mistakes. Corporate IT has to do the same thing, but without the size of organisation behind them. With SAAS providers talking about having millions of users, not thousands, like most corporate IT departments, they are able to make use of massive economies of scale. Their server farms will be designed from the ground up to be reliable, and, if a component does fail, there'll be robust systems that kick in to prevent the whole service falling over. It has to be like this; when you've got millions of users globally, you can't afford the [PR disaster](http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2011/oct/12/blackberry-server-problems-users) that would result from a wholesale system failure. Again, corporate IT should be doing the same thing, but 100% service levels are extremely expensive to achieve. SAAS software has to be easy to use and highly configurable, especially in a competitive marketplace. So SAAS providers generally invest vast sums in creating highly configurable and intuitive user interfaces. They know they are competing in a consumer market; not just for the enterprise spend, but also for the individual. That sort of investment is something you rarely see in corporate software which is usually designed around the needs of the organisation rather than the end user. You see this especially in the area of integration. SAAS providers of different, inter-related applications often work together in partnerships to make sure their applications work together seamlessly, using published data transfer protocols. With web services, data can be brought in in real time. Again, this level of investment often isn't available to our corporate systems, and so we end up with kludged joins between applications, and impenetrable users interfaces that wouldn't survive a minute in the open market. So, what's the future for corporate IT, when much of what they offer has been commoditised?

### Work with the SAAS providers {#work-with-the-saas-providers}

If you can't compete, then join with them. Build partnerships so that you can recommend cost-effective solutions to your business. Your job will be to carry out all the necessary [due diligence](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2011/10/06/cloud-systems-security-questions?blog=5) to make sure the service you'll get is as good, and as secure, as anything you could have provided internally. Why would you want to manage systems like email, CRM, finance, collaboration etc, when these are now no longer specialist systems? Instead, find a trusted partner who can just pull you into their existing infrastructure.

### Focus on the difficult bits to make them easier {#focus-on-the-difficult-bits-to-make-them-easier}

There will be some corporate systems that don't have an equivalent in the SAAS world. They're so specialised that no-one's going to commoditise them. Focus on these and, in particular, on where they will join up with other systems. Standardise on the data interfaces to make it easier to join them up to other systems. Consider designing those systems so they could themselves become multi-tenanted. You never know, what you're building might be a SAAS system of the future!

### Become a trusted partner {#become-a-trusted-partner}

If you're seen to have the best interests of the business and its users at heart, regardless of whether you provide the solution or not, then you will be the people the business turns to to solve their problems. Instead of being a blocker to the business, the IT department becomes an enabler.