# Itiel Dror on factors that affect retention {#itiel-dror-on-factors-that-affect-retention}

_Date posted: 10 February 2009_

This was originally posted as a response to [Clive Shepherd's post](http://clive-shepherd.blogspot.com/2009/02/itiel-provides-more-food-for-thought.html). So read that first, to set the context. If you're not going to do that, then you need to know that [Itiel Dror](http://users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/id/) was speaking at the Learning Technologies conference. He demonstrated two investigations he'd carried out, which illustrated factors that affected how much people remember after certain periods of time. The first looked at how we present information:

*   linearly (click next to continue)
*   content alongside a map of the rest of the content
*   a map only - which users return to after looking at each piece of content

The second looked at how people remember more from a health and safety video when they're asked to interact with the video - making choices, identifying issues etc I had big questions about Itiel's first investigation. The key thing for me was that the pages of content were unrelated. This, therefore, bears no relation to real-life situations where the content within a site/module is usually related in some way. All the learners were being asked to do was remember the content on the pages. So, it may be that the "linear" one just offered fewer distractions and allowed them to focus on one topic at a time. Itiel's second test was far more realistic, and therefore far more impressive. It clearly showed the benefits of interacting with the content (as well as people). But then people like [Terry Anderson](http://terrya.edublogs.org/) have been [saying that for years](http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/149/230). The critical thing here is understanding the nature of interaction. It's not something that can be added in to the content at the last minute, it needs to be embedded as a coherent part of the way the content works. An interaction, for me, is where the learner does something to the content - expecting a response, or vice versa. It could be as simple as asking a question which then pushes the learner into the next stage of the materials. Or a set of questions which force the learner to reflect on the previous chunk of content. But, write the **questions first**, then the content. Or a branching navigation, where your score is displayed progressively as you make your choices. At its most effective, we get games. And here I mean real games, that are engrossing, even addictive, demanding time, ingenuity and imagination from the learner.