# Mark Berthelemy :: Weblog :: My hidden agenda: Developing reflective practice {#mark-berthelemy-weblog-my-hidden-agenda-developing-reflective-practice}

_Date posted: 5 May 2006_

[http://elgg.cpdconnections.net/berthelemy/weblog/109.html](http://elgg.cpdconnections.net/berthelemy/weblog/109.html)

If anyone's interested in my not-so hidden agenda, I've posted some thoughts on my CPD Connections blog. They're reproduced here for my own reference, but if you want to comment, you'll need to go to the original post.

> ### My hidden agenda: Developing reflective practice {#my-hidden-agenda-developing-reflective-practice}
> 
> Well, not so hidden, as it's my main topic of conversation for anyone that will listen! Reflective practice is an essential part of any effective professional development. And that goes for any role in any organisation, whether you're a doctor, a teacher, a manager, or a packer on the factory floor. If we don't reflect on what we're doing, and try to find ways to improve it, we simply become cogs in a machine, rather than key parts in the machine's development. Now, I know a lot depends on the motivation of the individuals and the ways in which the organisation allows learning to happen. But my aim is to encourage that sort of bottom-up and top-down learning which hopefully meets in the middle. I'm in good company: Christpher Sessums ([[Click to view link]](http://elgg.net/csessums/weblog/)) is a keen advocate of reflective practice as part of teacher professional development, as is Jo McLeay ([[Click to view link]](http://theopenclassroom.blogspot.com/2006/04/teacher-reflecting.html)). Jo make's the point that "No matter what method of reflection you use, mental, verbal, or written, it is a vital tool to use towards self-improvement in teaching." I would remove the last two words here... reflection is a vital tool to use towards self-improvement. In whatever context. So, how do we encourage the bottom-up motivation, and the top-down enabling? What needs to happen so that people will reflect on what they're learning? Where does shared reflection fit in (like we're doing here at CPD Connections)? How should an organisation guide reflection on a specific focus area? My view is that every level of the organisation needs to be doing reflective practice, and if senior levels wish to encourage shared reflection, they themselves need to be modelling it. Now, for many organisations, that's a massive culture shift - towards a far more open way of working, where the ideas of any individual hold equal weight. Is this me being idealistic? I don't think so. Modern organisations are finding that in order to be able to change direction rapidly, they need a much more flexible and open networked structure, which encourages learning and development and thus creativity. John Seely-Brown & John Hagel's draft paper "From push to pull: Emerging Models for Mobilizing Resources", describes a number of case studies particularly well: [[Click to view link]](http://www.johnseelybrown.com/pushmepullyou4.72.pdf) John Seely-Brown also provides a number of useful resources around creating a culture of learning: [[Click to view link]](http://www.johnseelybrown.com/speeches.html#learningculture) The video clip is a particularly good introduction to the changes that might be required.