# Blended learning - back to basics {#blended-learning-back-to-basics}

_Date posted: 14 July 2008_

[Clive Shepherd](http://clive-shepherd.blogspot.com/2008/07/is-everything-blend.html) and I have been having a spirited discussion about the concept (or not) of "blended learning". I think my last comment got lost in the Blogger system, and I wanted to get some ideas down here anyway... Basically, Clive has put forward a definition of blended learning that describes it as a situation that uses a variety of media in a variety of social contexts (ie. group size). To my mind this covers pretty much every learning situation, so I can't see the need for a separate definition of "blended" learning (which should actually be blended _teaching_ anyway, but that's another argument). I gave an example from a typical (pre-internet) primary/secondary classroom: - self-study (eg. children working through worksheets, reading books etc); - one-to-one (eg. children reading individually with me) - small group (eg. children working together on a science experiment) - larger community (eg. children presenting ideas in school assembly) You could equally use a typical face-to-face training session which includes reading, small group discussion, presentation to the wider group, viewing of materials on a screen etc. Clive responded with the comment:

> "... I must admit that my primary perspective on this issue is work-based learning, where this scenario would be extremely rare."

If that is the case then we are in a very sad situation, where, by trying to constantly find shortcuts to learning we have thrown out everything that we know about how people learn. I think it starts at University, where the lecture seems to be the dominant teaching form (regardless of its effectiveness) and we then assume that all adults learn through single medium, single context situations. So, workplace learning professionals out there, do you think we need to go back to school to learn how to teach again?