# Click

for usability advice {#click-here-for-usability-advice}

_Date posted: 5 February 2012_

When you take exams, you're told to carefully read every question, and particularly the rubric at the beginning of the exam, which explains how the exam is going to work. Even then, people don't read the questions properly. When you're working on a screen it's even worse. According to people like [Jacob Neilsen](http://www.useit.com/papers/webwriting/writing.html), most people really don't read what's in front of them. Instead they scan, picking out individual words and sentences. As well as headings and bullets, users expect to be able to scan for links, and to be able to know quickly where those links will take them. It's a concept known as "scent". When we give them a link that just says "here", or even "click here", it contains no information or scent about where that link will take them. And because the user is scanning the page, they are unlikely to read the information to either side of the link which does explain it. Or if they do, it's only because they've had to. Your job, as an interface designer, is to make life easier for the user, and to remove barriers to usage. Forcing them to read where they would normally scan is unhelpful and inconsiderate. Instead of the "Click here" link, provide a link that is explicit about where the user will go, or what will happen. For example: "Continue reading", "More information", "Location map" For some designers, that's counter-intuitive, and can feel almost too abrupt or impolite. But actually it's the opposite. You are helping your users - and they will thank you for it. If you really want to design your websites and applications for usability, then get hold of [Don't Make Me Think](http://www.sensible.com/dmmt.html), by Steve Krug. It's one of the best books I know on the subject!