# Open letter to Ed Balls - secretary of state for education {#open-letter-to-ed-balls-secretary-of-state-for-education}

_Date posted: 24 July 2008_

This letter (sent to Ed Balls today) was stimulated by [Doug Dickinson's ongoing passionate plea for a rethink in the SATs system](http://www.dougdickinson.co.uk/blog/2008/07/some-common-sense-perhaps.html), and continues [my own small campaign](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2007/05/21/sats_why_oh_why_oh_why) to change it.

> Dear Mr Balls, I am writing to express my personal opinion on the issue of SATs testing. As a former teacher (secondary and primary), a former primary school governor, a professional elearning consultant and a parent of two children in primary school, I have a keen interest in how we provide an effective education for our children. My understanding of the rationale behind the SATs is that they are intended to act as a measure of the school's effectiveness, and therefore a measure of the effectiveness of government policy. I have no problem with this. Such measures are essential if we are to know whether our policies and practices are working. I have two issues: 1) The SATs tests, by focussing on just English, Maths and Science, do not measure the overall effectiveness of schools. For most schools it is logical for them to focus their attention on the areas that are being measured - to the detriment of other subjects. If we believe that PE, Geography, PSHE etc are important parts of our children's education, should these not be measured as well? 2) The pressure on schools to achieve good results is passed down to the children. This leads to the perceived need for exam coaching, practice tests and private tuition - all of which are unnecessary (as stated by your colleague [Estelle Morris](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/7519595.stm)). How can we persuade schools to stop putting on this pressure, when their very existence may be subject to the results of the tests? I would agree with those people who call for a sampling-led system of measurement. The ideal, in all research, is to take measurements without impacting on the thing being measured. Random sampling of teacher assessments, across the whole curriculum would go some way to alleviating the problems I've outlined above. I do hope that the problems you are having with the ETS marking system allow you to rethink how we measure the effectiveness of schools. In the long term, I also hope this leads to a wider rethink of what we really want schools to be doing, as is happening in Scotland. Yours sincerely, Mark