# Training can not lead to learning without feedback {#training-can-not-lead-to-learning-without-feedback}

_Date posted: 5 September 2009_

[A while back](http://www.learningconversations.co.uk/main/index.php/2007/12/14/death_of_the_one_hit_wonder?blog=5), I wrote about the importance of dialogue and feedback to ensure effective change. Far too often I come across people asking for "learning modules" which are intended to change behaviours or develop skills or knowledge, yet many times are purely about providing information, hints, tips, guidance etc. So what is it that makes an information module into a _**learning**_ module? The secret ingredient is feedback. For simple changes that feedback could be given programmatically. ie. through the learning module itself. (Please note that I have not specified **online** - a learning module can be delivered through a book, a DVD, a podcast etc). Programmatic feedback is a means of allowing the learner to interact with the material and the material provides feedback on performance. The more complex the change required, the more complex the programming will need to become. This can lead to the sorts of Serious Games and simulations that are starting to make an impace now. There comes a point, though, when human interaction is essential to give feedback. For financial reasons this is usually minimised as much as possible. Yet that can be a short-sighted decision which means that all the work put into the module materials does not bear fruit. Human feedback can come from the learner's peer group (through action learning sets, or online forums), from a "tutor" (again using either face-to-face or online means), or from a manager (via coaching or one-to-ones). The most cost-effective of these ought to be the manager. They know the learner the best. They work with them on a daily basis, and they understand the changes needed, and the context within which the learner is working. That's the ideal. Many organisations, however, don't seem to work in that way, and the feedback process is either left out or handled by professional trainers who will only see the learner maybe once or twice. Only once have I worked on a project where management coaching, feedback and facilitation was a central part of ensuring the effectiveness of the learning module. It was expensive to implement; requiring some upskilling of the managers - but, by all measures, it was a great success. It achieved all its stated objectives (including leading to measurable improvements in the business), and left a workforce that was ready for further changes. If we don't build feedback into our training, then we may as well not bother if we want lasting change. [This post was stimulated by an advert for the Open University, which highlighted the yawning chasm between [their view of distance learning](http://www3.open.ac.uk/study/explained/what-will-it-be-like.shtml) and most workplace-learning initiatives.]